Over the millennium the tourism industry has weathered
through natural disasters, terrorism, political and biological
threats. However, the Covid-19 crisis has been the most
impactful in this century that the industry has had to go
through. The consequences are so widespread that it is
expected to have a lagged recovery owing to its high correlation
to market growth dynamics. In the short to medium term, the
elements of the tourism landscape, especially the hospitality
industry and its segmented customer groups will continue to
face unprecedented challenges for at least two years from now.
Reacting and adapting with agility to engage customers with
new rules and regulations will be imperative for survival and
growth.
With a sharp reduction in demand in 2020 and pent-up demand
for 2021, the value proposition and segment mix for hotels has
changed dramatically. MICE has been affected the most due to
the digitization of the segment. In the Indian context where the
economy has contracted by 8%, is pegged at an 11.5% growth
rate for the year 2021 as per the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). This is a good sign for the leisure travel market with
disposable income being available for holiday selection in 2021
albeit the new customer of the tourism, hospitality, and events
industry will have a distinctive focus and demand on safety,
hygiene, and privacy.


As the adage goes “Never let a good crisis go to waste”, the
tourism industry has an opportunity to metamorphose into an
industry with dramatic growth and scale. This transformation
however has its own sets of challenges that are not limited to
travel advisories, erratic border shutdowns internationally and
domestically, reduced group travel, and fear in the minds of the
traveller. A turnaround amidst the Covid-19 crisis will entail the
following:

1. A well-crafted communication strategy
Given the uncertainty around how long the Covid-19 pandemic
will last, which could be well over 3 years from December 2019, a
long term communication plan at all levels of the tourism
industry and government will be the focal point.
A communication strategy will give unique positioning
opportunities to businesses to engage and re-engage new and
loyal customers as they gain back their trust.

2. Capitalizing on inward-looking opportunities
Catering to the domestic market will be central to an
organisation's strategy, as an outcome of these unlikely
collaborations, opportunities, methods, and practices will take
shape. New and niche experiences that spell out value for
money, grandeur, safety, and privacy in the promotions of
products and services will be offered to the customers in this
new era.

3. Increased dialogue between governments and
industry
A greater synergy between industry and government will be
witnessed as the tourism, hospitality, and event industry have
greatly been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. As an outcome
of these discussions, governments will evaluate the cost benefits
of their support and relief provided to an industry that is an
employer to many and one of the first few to start bleeding on
account of the pandemic.


4. Development of sustainable Tourism infrastructure
and policy
The pandemic has presented a unique opportunity to tourism
infrastructure and development that was lacking and be used as
a lever to drive growth. Developing people will be integral
alongside infrastructure boost to reset the travel and tourism
landscape. A flexible policy formation approach that allows for
governments and organisations to be reactive will need to be
taken keeping sustainability, long-term benefits, and crisis
management as part of the goals and objectives.

5. Re-balancing the services and product revenue mix
Organisations will see opportunities to create and charge for
incidentals that arise in the name of safety, health, hygiene,
brand, and values being offered to this new era of customers
that demands and expects a level of service very different from
the past, with increased prices. Traditional services and product
revenue mix no longer stands as a reference to forecast making
rebalancing of sales estimate on longer time frames unreliable
and increasing pressure in the sales force to deliver with new
product and service offerings.
Trust & Safety will be the key calling card for businesses and
governments alike and making it antecedents to customer
purchase decisions to buy tourism, hospitality, and event
product and services. Verified, clear, transparent, and quick
communication will be vital in the coming times to set things
back on track for the global tourism industry
